@title: Launchpad workflows for the SCons addon Tools
@author: Dirk Baechle



== Basic branching == branch


== Getting a Launchpad login == login

== Merging, contributing your patched code == merge

The practice currently regarded best, is to branch the current mainline of a Tool, 
add your changes, and then propose your branch for a merge via Launchpad.
One of the Tool's admins should then merge the user's branch locally, resolve
conflicts and finally pushes the result up again.

== Setting up a project for a new tool == newproject

The single steps are:

* Login in with your user account
* Go to the main page at [[launchpad.net]] and click on "Register a project"
* Fill out the details for the first page. Name the project "scons-xyz", where
"xyz" is the name of your tool.
* Fill out the second page, and confirm "Create new project"
{{* Now you can upload your current version of the tool by

Code:
bzr push lp:~user/scons-xyz/trunk

which pushes it to the automatically created "trunk" series.
}}

== How to add a downloadable archive to your new project == archive

Select the "trunk" series in the Project's main page

Image: click_series_in_overview.png


"Create a new milestone" and enter a version number

Image: create_milestone.png

Back in the overview page for the "trunk" series, create a new release

Image: create_release.png

Fill out the form for the release and confirm

Image: enter_data_and_confirm.png


Go back to the tool's page on Launchpad, and do a refresh in your browser. Then click on the
"trunk" series link. You should see a page like this:

Image: trunkseries1.png

If this has not been done already, link the uploaded branch to this series. Clicking on "Link the branch to this series", select the "trunk" branch...

Image: trunkseries2.png

and get the addition of the series confirmed, after clicking 

Image: trunkseries3.png

Now you can add your TAR archive for download

Image: add_file_for_download.png

...

Image: file_was_uploaded.png

and the archive should get available for download.

Image: release_downloadable.png

== Links ==

Some helpful links are

*[[https://help.launchpad.net/Projects/Registering]]
*[[https://help.launchpad.net/Projects/SeriesMilestonesReleases]]

